Added high level overview to documentation (#112)
Percona-Lab/postgres: contrib/pg_tde/documentation/docs/architecture.md

# PG_TDE High Level Overview

## Goals

Pg_tde aims to be a (1) customizable, (2) complete, (3) data at rest encryption (4) extension for PostgreSQL.

Customizable (1) means that `pg_tde` aims to support many different use cases:

* Encrypting every table in every database or only some tables in some databases
* Encryption keys can be stored on various external key storage servers (Hashicorp Vault, KMIP servers, ...)
* Using one key for everything or different keys for different databases

> * Storing every key at the same key storage, or using different storages for different databases

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Storing every key on the same key storage or using different storages for different databases
```

* Handling permissions: who can manage database specific or global permissions, who can create encrypted or not encrypted tables

Complete (2) means that `pg_tde` aims to encrypt everything written to the disk: data at rest (3).
This includes:

* Table data files
* Indexes
* Temporary tables
* Write ahead log
* PG-994 System tables (not yet implemented)

> * PG-993 Temporary files (not yet implemented)

Reviewer: Make sense to have PG-XXX as links or remove it

Reviewer 2: I vote for removing it. We'll have to remove the links anyway once implemented

Extension (4) means that ideally `pg_tde` entirely should be implemented only as an extension, possibly compatible with any PostgreSQL distribution, including the open source community version.
This requires changes in the core (making it more extensible), which means currently `pg_tde` only works with the Percona Distribution.

## Main components

> Pg_tde consist of 3 main components:

Reviewer: It says 3 components but in following text is har to comprehend what those 3 are exactly are. Maybe, either add some kind of numeration in the text (not necessary numbered list, maybe just "Firstly, ...") or remove 3 from these sentence

Reviewer 2: Reworded

Additionally, core changes also add encryption-awareness to some command line tools that have to work directly with encrypted tables or encrypted WAL.
Alternatively, these could be implemented as duplicated tools in part of the extension, but keeping everything in the original tool allows a better user experience, as currently `pg_tde` requires the Percona Distribution anyway.

Our patched postgres can be found at the following location:
https://github.com/percona/postgres/tree/TDE_REL_17_STABLE 

The `pg_tde` extension implements the encryption code itself by hooking into the extension points introduced in the core changes, and the already existing extension points in the PostgreSQL server.
Everything is controllable with GUC variables and SQL statements, similar to other extensions.

Finally, the keyring API / libraries implement actual key storage logic with different providers.
In the future these could be extracted into separate shared libraries with an open API, allowing third party providers.
Currently the API already exists, but it is internal only and keyring libraries are part of the main library for simplicity.

## Encryption architecture

### Two key hierarchy

> `Pg_tde` uses a two level key structure, also found commonly in other database servers:

Reviewer: I don't think `pg_tde` should start from the capital letter even in the beginning of a sentence etc. We don't do this across the rest of the docs anyway.

Reviewer 2: Does it make sense to add a digram how all those components interact with each other?

The higher level keys are called "principal keys". These are the keys that are stored externally using the keyring APIs, and these are used to encrypt the "internal keys".

`Pg_tde` uses one principal key per database, every internal key for the given database is encrypted using this principal key.

> Internal keys are used for specific database files: each file that has a different Oid and has a different internal key.

Reviewer: Reference https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/datatype-oid.html for "Oid"?

Reviewer 2: Thank you, added the link

Reviewer 2: Thank you, added the link

> Internal keys are used for specific database files: each file that has a different Oid and has a different internal key.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Internal keys are used for specific database files: each file with a different Oid has a different internal key.
```

> This means that for example a table with 4 indexes will have at least 5 internal keys - one for the table, and one for each index.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This means that, for example, a table with 4 indexes will have at least 5 internal keys - one for the table and one for each index.
```

> If the table has additional files, such as sequence(s) or a toast table, those files also have separate keys.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the table has additional files, such as sequence(s) or a toast table, those files will also have separate keys.
```
to align the time with the previous sentence

### Encryption algorithm

`Pg_tde` currently uses a hardcoded AES-CBC-128 algorithm for encrypting most database files.
First the internal keys in the datafile are encrypted using the principal key with AES-CBC-128, then the file data itself is again encrypted using AES-CBC-128 with the internal key.

WAL encryption is different, it uses AES-CTR-128.

> Support for other cipher lengths / algorithms is planned in the future (PG-1194).

Reviewer: PG-1194 should be a link?

### Marking encrypted objects

`Pg_tde` makes it possible to encrypt everything, or only some tables in some databases.

> To support this without metadata changes, encrypted tables are marked with a marker access method:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To support this without metadata changes, encrypted tables are labeled with a marker access method:
```
to avoid repetition

`tde_heap` is the same as `heap`, it uses the same functions internally without any changes, but with the different name and Id, `pg_tde` knows that `tde_heap` tables are encrypted, and `heap` tables aren't.

The initial decision is made using the postgres event trigger mechanism:
if a `CREATE TABLE` or `ALTER TABLE` statement uses `tde_heap`, the newly created data files are marked as encrypted, and then file operations encrypt/decrypt the data.

Later decisions are made using a slightly modified SMGR API:

> when a database file is recreated with a different Id, for example because of a `TRUNCATE` or `VACUUM FULL`, the new file is either encrypted or plain based on the encryption information of the previous file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
when a database file is recreated with a different Id, for example because of a `TRUNCATE` or `VACUUM FULL`, the new file is either encrypted or remains plain based on the encryption information of the previous file.
```

Reviewer 3: Nah, I do not think that makes it cleaer.

### SMGR API

`Pg_tde` relies on a slightly modified version of the SMGR API.
These modifications include:

* Making the API generally extensible, where extensions can inject custom code into the storage manager
* Adding tracking information for files:
  when a new file is created for an existing relation, references to the existing file are also passed to the smgr functions

> With these modifications, the `pg_tde` extension can implement an additional layer on top of the normal MD SMGR API, which encrypts a file before writing if the related table is encrypted, and similarly decrypts it after reading when needed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With these modifications, the `pg_tde` extension can implement an additional layer on top of the normal MD SMGR API, which encrypts a file before writing to the disk if the related table is encrypted and similarly decrypts it after reading when needed.
```

### Encrypting other access methods

Currently `pg_tde` only encrypts heap tables and other files (indexes, toast tables, sequences) related to the heap tables.
Indexes include any kind of index that goes through the SMGR API, not just the built-in indexes in postgres.

In theory, it is possible to also encrypt any other table access method that goes through the SMGR API, by similarly providing a marker access method to it and extending the event triggers.

### WAL encryption

> WAL encryption is currently controlled globally, it's either turned on or off with a global GUC variable that requires a server restart.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
WAL encryption is currently applied globally, it's either turned on or off with a global GUC variable that requires a server restart.
```

The variable only controls writes, when it is turned on, WAL writes are encrypted.

This means WAL files can contain both encrypted and unencrpyted data, depending on what the status of this variable was when writing the data.
`pg_tde` keeps track of the encryption status of WAL records using internal keys:
every time the encryption status of WAL changes, it writes a new internal key for WAL.
When the encryption is turned on, this internal key contains a valid encryption key.

> When the encrpytion is turned off, it only contains a flag signaling that WAL encryption ended.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the encryption is turned off, it only contains a flag signaling that WAL encryption ended.
WAL keys also contain the [LSN](https://pgpedia.info/l/LSN-log-sequence-number.html) of the first WAL write after key creation. This allows to know what WAL ranges are encrypted (or not) with which key.
```

With this information, the WAL reader code can decide if a specific WAL records has to be decrypted or not.

### Principal key rotation

> To comply with common policies, and to handle situations with potentially exposed principal keys, principal keys can be rotated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To comply with common policies and to handle situations with potentially exposed principal keys, principal keys can be rotated.
```

The old key is kept as is at the same location, as it is potentially still needed to decrypt backups or other databases.

It is also possible that the location of the keyring changes:
either the service is moved to a new address, or the keyring has to be moved to a different keyring provider type. Both of these situations are supported by `pg_tde` using simple SQL functions.

In certain cases the SQL API can't be used for these operations:
if the server isn't running, and the old keyring is no longer available, startup can fail if it needs to access the encryption keys. 
For these situations, `pg_tde` also provides command line tools to recover the database.

### Internal key regeneration

Internal keys for files (tables, indexes, etc.) are fixed once the file is created, there's no way currently to re-encrypt a file.

There are workarounds for this, because operations that move the table data to a new file, such as `VACUUM FULL` or an `ALTER TABLE` that rewrites the file will create a new key for the new file, essentially rotating the internal key.

> This however means taking an exclusive lock on the table for the duration of the operation, which might not be desirable for huge tables.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This however means taking an exclusive lock on the table for the duration of the operation, which might not be desirable for huge tables.

WAL internal key are also fixed to the respective ranges. And there is no easy way to generate a new WAL key without turning off and on WAL encryption.
```

Reviewer 2: Do we want to document these workarounds? Won't a user strike themselves in the foot having this information?

Author: No, these won't result in any issues.

### Internal key storage

> Internal keys, and generally `pg_tde` metadata is kept in a single directory in `$PGDATA/pg_tde`. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Internal keys and generally `pg_tde` metadata are kept in a single directory in `$PGDATA/pg_tde`. 
```

In this directory each database has separate files, containing:

* Encrypted internal keys and internal key mapping to tables
* Information about the key providers

> There's also a special global section marked with the OID 607, which includes the global key providers / global internal keys.

Reviewer 2: Is this the global scope?

> This is used by the WAL encryption, and can optionally be used by specific databases too, if global provider inheritance is enabled.

Reviewer 2: Don't they use the default provider for this purpose? 
If not, let's explain the default scope and default provider here too.

### Key providers (principal key storage)

Principal keys are stored on external providers.
Currently pg_tde has 3 implementations:

* A local file storage, intended for development and testing only
* Hashicorp Vault
* KMIP compatible servers

In all cases, `pg_tde` requires a detailed configuration, including the address of the service and authentication information.
With these details, all operations are done by `pg_tde` based on user operations:

* When a new principal key is created, it will communicate with the service and upload a fresh key to it
* When a principal key is required for decryption, it will try to get the key from the service

### Sensitive key provider information

Some of the keyring provider information (authentication details) is potentially sensitive, and it is not safe to store it together with the database in the `$PGDATA` directory, or even on the same server.

> For this purpose, `pg_tde` provides a mechanism where instead of directly specifying the parameter, users can specify an external service instead, from where it downloads the information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For this purpose, `pg_tde` provides a mechanism for users to specify an external service from where to download the information instead of directly setting the parameter.
```

This way the configuration itself only contains the reference, not the actual authentication key or password.

Currently only HTTP or external file references are supported, but other possible mechanisms can be added later, such as kubernetes secrets.

## User interface

### Setting up pg_tde

To use `pg_tde`, users are required to:

* Add pg_tde to the `shared_preload_libraries` in `postgresql.conf`, as this is required for the SMGR extensions
* Execute `CREATE EXTENSION pg_tde` in the databases where they want to use encryption
* Optionally, enable `pg_tde.wal_encrypt` in `postgresql.conf`
* Optionally, disable `pg_tde.inherit_global_providers` in `postgresql.conf` (enabled by default)

### Adding providers

> Keyring providers can be added to either the GLOBAL or to the database specific scope.

Reviewer: Does it make sense to elaborate on what the GLOBAL scope is and what it is for?

Reviewer 2: Yes as it is confusing

Reviewer 2: But I'd ask a different question: do we need to have a User Interface section in the Architecture doc at all? It basically duplicates what we have in the whole doc set: how to set up pg_tde, what functions and params are there, etc.

Author: This is structured differently, as it was/is intended as a single document overview of everything.

pg_tde_show_global_key_provider_configuration(‘provider-name')
```

These functions display the provider type and configuration details, but won't show the sensitive parameters, such as passwords or authentication keys.

### Provider permissions

`Pg_tde` implements access control based on execution rights on the administration functions.

For provider administration, it provides two pair of functions:

```sql
pg_tde_(grant/revoke)_local_provider_management_to_role
pg_tde_(grant/revoke)_global_provider_management_to_role
```

There's one special behavior:
When `pg_tde.inherit_global_providers` is ON, users with database local permissions can list global providers, but can't use the show function to query configuration details.
When `pg_tde.inherit_global_providers` is OFF, they can't execute the function at all, it will return an error.

### Creating and rotating keys

Principal keys can be created or rotated using the following functions:

```sql
pg_tde_set_principal_key(‘key-name', ‘provider-name', ensure_new_key)
pg_tde_set_global_principal_key(‘key-name', ‘provider-name', ensure_new_key)
pg_tde_set_server_principal_key(‘key-name', ‘provider-name', ensure_new_key)
```

> `Ensure_new_key` is a boolean parameter defaulting to false.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`ensure_new_key` is a boolean parameter defaulting to false.
```

`pg_tde_verify_principal_key()` checks that the key provider is accessible, that the current principal key can be downloaded from it, and that it is the same as the current key stored in memory - if any of these fail, it reports an appropriate error.

### Listing all active keys (not yet implemented)

SUPERusers are able to use the following function:

`pg_tde_list_active_keys()`

Which reports all the actively used keys by all databases on the current server.
Similarly to `pg_tde_show_current_principal_key`, it only shows names and associated providers, it doesn't reveal any sensitive information about the providers.

### Key permissions

Users with management permissions to a specific database `(pg_tde_(grant/revoke)_provider_management_to_role)` can change the keys for the database, and use the current key functions. This includes creating keys using global providers, if `pg_tde.inherit_global_providers` is enabled.

Also, the `pg_tde_(grant/revoke)_key_management_to_role` function deals with only the specific permission for the above function:
it allows a user to change the key for the database, but not to modify the provider configuration.

> ### Creating tables

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Creating encrypted tables
```
